---
layout: post
title: "Blazor - a .NET based client-side web framework"
excerpt: "The what, why, how & when of Blazor for the dummies"
date: 2020-03-02
tags: [dev, programming, web, webdev, webassembly, dotnet, csharp, blazor]
categories: articles
comments: true
share: true
published: false
---

## What is Blazor?

It’s a new framework (based on .NET Core) for building interactive web applications, that is written in C# and @razor, and can run inside modern web browsers.

* It ports a .NET based runtime (that’s Blazor) targeting WebAssembly (coming May 2020)
* All UI stuffs are built as components, using @razor (a .NET way of writing HTML templates with C# code mixed in), with C# code for logic
* User interaction events & data binding are handled by Blazor framework
* Any pure logical/computational code is written in C#

So, if you use Blazor, you can write web front-end logic with C# rather than JavaScript (there are some glue JavaScript code required to interact with the DOM, but that is supplied by the Blazor framework).

Currently Blazor supports two modes or flavors

1. Server-side Blazor: The code runs on a .NET server (like an IIS server), the UI talks to the server through SignalR (.NET version of web socket), for any logic. And after logic is executed and result is returned by the server, Blazor updates the DOM as required with some internal JavaScript code.
2. Client-side Blazor: Client only Blazor that is fully WebAssembly compatible. No server required as the whole code runs on a WebAssembly enabled web browser.

The main difference is, where the C# code runs. In server-side approach, all the code that is in razor page or code-behind, will execute in server before the server sends out a response to the browser. In client-side approach, the code runs directly on browser, on a WebAssembly based .NET runtime.

NOTE: The client-side Blazor is not ready yet and should be released by May 2020, as announced by the team. The current available version, i.e. server-side Blazor does not really utilize WebAssembly as such. It’s just a .NET Core MVC application, where the framework does some additional infrastructure heavy-lifting so that UI events can easily talk to the server through SignalR & DOM updates are easily managed. So, the real “benefit” of this approach, IMHO, is just that you can write some web interaction logic in C# rather than JavaScript! There definitely can be a little performance gain because of compiled C# code, but when we add the network latency to the equation, probably it’ll not have any overall positive impact on the performance!

### Issues with Blazor

* Very promising, but not time tested on large applications. We have seen nice working demos, but it may so happen, that we face a scenario later into development, which Blazor still cannot solve!
* Does not support full WebAssembly mode yet! (Coming in May 2020)
* Community size is just a fraction of current JS community
* For development teams who are comfortable with TypeScript/JavaScript, “being able to write C# code” is not a real benefit for general web development, where there are great frameworks & tools already available
* Pure Blazor front-ends are built with .NET razor. It’s a good alternative, but pure HTML with a good JS framework (Angular, React or Vue) always has much better compatibility & flexibility for web development.
