---
layout: post
title: "CouchDB basics"
excerpt: "No material as such...best to ignore"
date: 2018-08-10
tags: [database, couchdb]
categories: articles
comments: true
share: true
published: false
---

## Examples - [CouchDB](http://couchdb.apache.org/)

CouchDB is an [open source](https://github.com/apache/couchdb) database under the [Apache Software Foundation](https://github.com/apache), which follows the semantics of a document store database. 

CouchDB can be [installed](http://couchdb.apache.org/#download) on Windows, macOS and Linux systems, as a single node database or a scalable cluster. It uses `JSON` for documents, provides `HTTP APIs` to interact with data. `JavaScript` can be used to manipulate data with functions like _MapReduce_.

* A database has documents. Documents have fields
* All documents have an _id field which is generally an auto-generated hash
* Fields can have simple data (primitive types) or objects, which is nothing but JSON formatted object or array
* Every time the document is updated (including create), it's another auto-generated field _rev is incremented in format n-id, where n is version number starting with 1
* Documents are pretty much independent (?), and can have own structure of data
* To query data like databases in  a server, documents in a database, data in a document - there is simple HTTP API for all
* To query at field level, one can use JavaScript to query document using map functions
* Map functions can be saved in the database as views, so that they can be called directly later. Views are collected under design documents, which are kind of collections of views (?)
* View functions are also available as HTTP APIs. They can take input parameters too
* Map functions can be combined with Reduce functions to do statistical calculations or to simply complex data
* CouchDB allows to add binary data (e.g. files) directly into documents as attachments. They gets added as pre-defined field `_attachments: [file1.png, file2.mp3]`
* Apart from the REST APIs which can be used form any kind of applications, some platforms/languages provide their custom made clients for CouchDB. But, at root, CouchDB works on HTTP.

#### CouchDB for building web applications

* CouchDB let's you server web application directly from the database as set of pages built with HTML and JavaScript.
* You can create/modify those pages to suit your needs and save them as attachments.
* Now you can serve those pages over HTTP to build a web application as CouchDB provides APIs to directly browse the attachments. Here, the attachments are simply HTML pages with JavaScript.
* This way, we have web application that is served completely by CouchDB, from pages to the actual data that runs JavaScript to interact directly with the CouchDB!
* And obviously, you can build your web application using any technology you want and then connect to CouchDB using the REST APIs or a technology specific client of choice.

#### CouchDB security

* Initially, by default, the whole set of APIs and the databases are open to all
* The default admin credentials are admin/admin
* You can login as admin and change the settings to secure part or the whole database so that it allows only valid users
* You can create users and assign them roles, and provide access accordingly